# Olin College Student Government Constitution

*Agreed upon by the Students of Olin College, in Town Hall Meeting, on April 13,
2018. This Constitution will sunset on March 1, 2020.*

## Preamble

*We, the students of Olin College of Engineering, establish this Constitution
to empower the Student Government to actively represent the interests and
fulfill the changing needs of the Student Body.*

## Part I. The Student Government.

### Article 1. The Nature of Student Government.

#### Section 1. The Relationship.

The elected Student Leadership - Executives, Representatives, and Committee
Leaders - together form the Student Government which will have sole authority
to allocate the Student Activities Fund and amend the Student Government
By-Laws. This group will also have several functions, as described in [Article 2](#article-2-the-student-government).
A smaller subsection of the Student Government - the Executives and the
Representatives - will comprise the Council of Olin Representatives which alone
may not allocate the Student Activities Fund or amend the Student Government
By-Laws. However, this group may make recommendations to the College
Administration and Board of Trustees on behalf of the Student Government, and
will work to compile Action Items and prioritize their execution, as described
in [Article 3](#article-3-the-council-of-olin-representatives).

Structuring the Council as a subsection of Student Government enables the
Council to continually represent the Student Body and frees the Committee
Leaders to execute their missions while still involving the entire Student
Leadership in decisions that impact the entire school.

### Article 2. The Student Government.

#### Section 1. Name.

The combined legislative and executive organization of the Student Body will be
known as the Student Government.

#### Section 2. Mission.

The Student Government will facilitate and ensure communication between the
Administration of the College, the Council of Olin Representatives, the Student
Government Committees, and the Student Body. The Student Government will
allocate and oversee the Student Activities Fund and coordinate initiatives
requiring the involvement of both the Council of Olin Representatives and the
Student Government Committees. The Student Government will establish and
develop initiatives which improve the lives of students at Olin College.

#### Section 3. Structure.

The Student Government will consist of the elected members of the Council of
Olin Representatives and the Leaders of the Student Government Committees. In
the event of the absence of a Leader of a Student Government Committee,
acknowledged by the presiding officer of the Student Government, the Assistant
Leader of the Student Government Committee may stand in for the Committee
Leader and may carry the full voting power of the absent Leader.

#### Section 4. Source of Authority.

The Student Government derives its power from the consent of the Students and
the trust of the Administration and Board of Trustees of the College.

#### Section 5. Student Activities Fee.

The Board of Trustees of the College has ultimate authority over the Student
Activities Fee, which each student pays annually. The Student Government may
recommend changes to the Student Activities Fee to the Board of Trustees.

#### Section 6. Student Activities Fund.

The Student Activities Fund is funded through the Student Activities Fee. The
Student Government has ultimate authority over the allocation of the Student
Activities Fund. The Student Government has the power to divide the Student
Activities Fund into virtual funds to be used by the Council of Olin
Representatives, by Student Government Committees, and for other purposes
defined in the Student Government By-Laws.

#### Section 7. Amending the By-Laws.

The Student Government may amend the Student Government By-Laws using the
procedure described in [Article 12](#article-12-amendment-procedures).

#### Section 8. Ad Hoc Representatives.

The Student Government may establish in the Student Government By-Laws elected
or appointed non-voting ad hoc representatives of the Council.

### Article 3. The Council of Olin Representatives.

#### Section 1. Name.

The core of the Student Government consisting of the Executives and the
Representatives will be known as the Council of Olin Representatives.

#### Section 2. Mission.

The Council of Olin Representatives will work to amplify student input on
issues under consideration by the administration and will support student
initiatives. The Council will represent Olinâ€™s student body to the
administration, other colleges, and the outside world, while working to improve
student life by supporting and developing solutions to issues facing the
student body.

#### Section 3. Structure.

The Council will be comprised of three Executive Officers and some number of
elected Representatives, as defined in the Student Government By-Laws. The
Executive Officers will include the President, the Vice President for
Communications, and the Vice President for Finance. Between Executives and
Representatives, there must be at least one member of each graduating class.

#### Section 4. Allocation Powers.

The Council may allocate money from any fund allocated to the Council by the
Student Government.

#### Section 5. Recommendations.

The Council may express the official opinion of the Student Government by
making recommendations to the Administration and Board of Trustees of the
College.

#### Section 6. Action Items.

The Council may demonstrate the commitment of the Student Government to an
issue facing the Student Body by assigning tasks to its members for the purpose
of resolving the issue.

#### Section 7. Committee Appointments.

If a committee or working group of faculty and/or staff requests student
representative(s), the Council may solicit volunteers from the Student Body to
fill the representative positions on that committee. If there are more
volunteers than available positions, the Council will appoint students by
excellence voting.

#### Section 8. Appellate Authority.

As the representatives of the Student Body, the Council will arbitrate any
major disagreements between a Committee Leader and their Assistant Leader as
well as any major disagreements between a Committee and a club or organization
being funded by a Committee. In case of disagreement, the Council has ultimate
authority over money from virtual funds involved in the disagreement over which
the Council does not normally have authority.

## Part II. The Student Government Committees

### Article 4. The Nature of the Committees.

#### Section 1. Names.

There will be four Student Government Committees: the Honor Board, the Student
Activities Committee, the Committee for Clubs and Organizations, and the
Committee for Supporting, Encouraging, and Recognizing Volunteerism.

#### Section 2. Purposes.

The Student Government Committees will perform the day to day operations
required to maintain the various aspects of student life, including allocation
of funds to clubs and organizations, funding and organizing events and
initiatives, and the administration of the Honor Code.

#### Section 3. Structures.

Each Committee has a Chair or Director (Leader) and a Vice Chair or Assistant
Director (Assistant). The Leader sits on Student Government, and can be
substituted in the event of absence, as outlined in [Article 2, Section 3](#section-3-structure).
The Committees may have additional members to fulfill their respective
missions.

### Article 5. The Honor Board

#### Section 1. Mission.

The mission of the Honor Board is specified in the Honor Code.

#### Section 2. Structure.

The structure of the Honor Board is specified in the Honor Code. The Chair of
the Honor Board will sit on Student Government.

#### Section 3. Funding.

The Chair and Vice Chair will have the power to distribute and spend any funds
allocated to the Honor Board by the Student Government.

#### Section 4. Responsibility.

The Honor Board will encourage and promote a safe and ethical student
environment, as defined by the Honor Code.

#### Section 5. Purview.

The Honor Board has sole responsibility for administering the Honor Code
procedures.

#### Section 6. Audits.

The Honor Board will periodically review the actions of the Student Government
to ensure that the elected Student Leadership is abiding by the Governing
Documents. This process will be conducted as described in [Part 3, Article 9](#article-9-student-government-audits)
of the Student Government Constitution.

### Article 6. The Student Activities Committee.

#### Section 1. Mission.

The Student Activities Committee will maintain and expand a continuous,
diverse, and accessible set of social opportunities for the entire Student Body.

#### Section 2. Structure.

The Student Activities Committee will be led by the Director of Student
Activities and the Assistant Director of Student Activities who are elected by
the Student Body. Additional membership will be governed by the Student
Government By-Laws.

#### Section 3. Funding.

The Director and Assistant Director of Student Activities will have the power
to distribute and spend any funds allocated to the Student Activities Committee
by the Student Government.

### Article 7. The Committee for Clubs and Organizations.

#### Section 1. Mission.

The Committee for Clubs and Organizations will enable students to pursue their
interests, facilitate the formation of diverse communities, and promote the
continuation of a rich and healthy club culture at the College by financially
subsidizing and encouraging the growth of student groups.

#### Section 2. Structure.

The Committee for Clubs and Organizations will be led by the Director of Clubs
and Organizations and the Assistant Director of Clubs and Organizations who are
elected by the Student Body. Additional membership will be governed by the
Student Government By-Laws.

#### Section 3. Funding.

The Director and Assistant Director of Clubs and Organizations will have the
power to distribute and spend any funds allocated to the Committee for Clubs
and Organizations by the Student Government.

### Article 8. The Committee for Supporting, Encouraging, and Recognizing Volunteerism.

#### Section 1. Mission.

The Committee for Supporting, Encouraging, and Recognizing Volunteerism will
support and encourage volunteerism, service, and philanthropy in the Olin
Community through the funding and organization of service oriented clubs,
organizations, and activities.

#### Section 2. Structure.

The Committee for Supporting, Encouraging, and Recognizing Volunteerism will be
led by the Director of Service and the Assistant Director of Service who are
elected by the Student Body. Additional membership will be governed by the
Student Government By-Laws.

#### Section 3. Funding.

The Director and Assistant Director of Service will have the power to
distribute and spend any funds allocated to the Committee for Supporting,
Encouraging, and Recognizing Volunteerism by the Student Government.

## Part III. Procedures and Provisions.

### Article 9. Student Government Audits.

#### Section 1. Purpose.

To ensure that the Student Government Constitution and By-Laws are followed,
Student Government will periodically meet with one or more representatives of
the Honor Board to review the actions of Student Government.

#### Section 2. Procedure.

At each Review, should the Honor Board find that a portion of the governing
documents are not being followed, the Honor Board will request that the
person(s) responsible resolve the issue within an appropriate amount of time
after which the person(s) responsible must send the Honor Board a report
outlining how and when the issue was resolved. The time allowed for the report
is up to the discretion of the Honor Board. If a report is not filed outlining
the resolution of the infraction within the given timeframe, the Honor Board
may file a case report about Student Government citing the infraction, and an
abstract will be published to the community after investigation and resolution
through the Honor Board process.

### Article 10. Election Procedures.

#### Section 1. Election Monitor.

The all-school elections will be facilitated by a member of the Student
Government not running for re-election. In the case that no member is eligible,
a substitute will be selected to perform the duties of the Election Monitor as
specified in the By-Laws.

#### Section 2. Campaigning.

To preserve an intellectual atmosphere and guarantee equal opportunities of
election, campaigning is only allowed at the College within published
guidelines specified in the Student Government By-Laws. The Election Monitor
presiding over the election, and as needed, the Honor Board, will jointly
investigate allegations of campaigning and decide upon potential resolutions -
up to and including removal from the ballot.

#### Section 3. Voting.

Voting for all positions will occur by excellence (approval) voting and by
secret ballot.

### Article 11. Governing Documents and their Precedence.

#### Section 1. Precedence.

There will be three Governing Documents of the Student Body each of which has
an order of precedence. If changes at a higher level of precedence invalidate
those at a lower level, the lower documents must be modified to accommodate
those changes.

#### Section 2. Honor Code.

As the ethical framework of the Student Body, the Honor Code takes precedence
over the other two Governing Documents. No Governing Document or policy of the
Student Government may contradict the Honor Code.

#### Section 3. Student Government Constitution.

The Student Government Constitution takes precedence over the Student
Government By-Laws but may not contradict the Honor Code. The Constitution
governs the purpose, structure, and powers of the Student Government, Council
of Olin Representatives, and Student Government Committees.

#### Section 4. Student Government By-Laws.

The Student Government By-Laws do not take precedence over the other two
Governing Documents. The By-Laws govern the specific roles and responsibilities
of elected officials. The By-Laws will also specify meeting frequency and
funding procedures of the Student Government, the Council of Olin
Representatives, and the Student Government Committees.

### Article 12. Amendment Procedures.

#### Section 1. Amendments to the Honor Code.

The Honor Code may be amended by procedures specified in the Honor Code.

#### Section 2. Amendments to the Student Government Constitution.

The Student Government Constitution may be amended by a simple majority vote of
the Students present at a Town Hall Meeting where a quorum of one half of the
Student Body is present.

#### Section 3. Amendments to the Student Government By-Laws.

In order to keep the Student Government adaptable to change, the Student
Government By-Laws may be amended by the Student Government with the approval
of three-fourths of its voting members.

### Article 13. Ratification and Review

#### Section 1. Ratification.

For this Student Government Constitution to go into effect, it must be ratified
by a simple majority vote of the Students present at a Town Hall Meeting where
quorum is one half of the Student Body, including proxy voters.

#### Section 2. Review and Sunset.

This Student Government Constitution will be reviewed by the Student Government
in two yearâ€™s time. In order to enforce the review, this Constitution will
sunset on the 1st of March, 2020. If this Constitution is still appropriate,
relevant, and effective at that time, the Student Body may choose to amend this
section to renew this Constitution. In the event that this section is not
amended by that time, the Student Body must ratify a new Constitution as
described in [Article 13, Section 1](#section-1-ratification).
